Add Gitpod reference architecture (#2106)
gitpod-io/website: gitpod/docs/self-hosted/latest/reference-architecture/production-ready.md

---
section: self-hosted/latest
title: "Self-Hosted Reference Architecture"
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

<script lang="ts">

  import Overview from "./_chunks/overview.md";
  import Preparations from "./_chunks/preparations.md";
  import Cluster from "./_chunks/cluster.md";
  import Database from "./_chunks/database.md";
  import Storage from "./_chunks/storage.md";
  import Install from "./_chunks/install.md";
</script>

# Self-Hosted Reference Architecture

> This guide describes a production-ready reference architecture for Gitpod. It consists of a Kubernetes cluster, cert-manager, external MySQL database, external OCI image registry, and external object storage. It includes instructions on how to set up this reference architecture on different cloud providers.

Reviewer: **Suggestion:** 

```suggestion
This guide describes a production-ready reference architecture for Gitpod. It consists of a Kubernetes cluster, cert-manager, external MySQL database, external OCI image registry, and external object storage. It includes instructions on how to set up this reference architecture on the officially supported cloud providers: GCP and AWS.
```

> This reference architecture can be used as a blueprint for your Gitpod installation: Start with this reference architecture and adapt it to your needs. The reference architecture as described in this guide is what we support and what we use to test every release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This reference architecture can be used as a blueprint for your Gitpod installation: Start with this reference architecture and adapt it to your needs. The reference architecture as described in this guide is what Gitpod supports, and is used to test against every self-hosted Gitpod release.
```

</div>

</CloudPlatformToggle>

## Kubernetes Cluster

The heart of this reference architecture is a **Kubernetes cluster** where all Gitpod components are deployed to. This cluster consists of two node pools:

1. **Services Node Pool**: On these nodes, the Gitpod “app” with all its services are deployed to. These services provide the users with the dashboard and manages the provisioning of workspaces.
2. **Workspaces Node Pool**: On the workspace nodes, Gitpod deploys the actual workspaces (where the actual developer work is happening). Because workspaces have vastly differing resource and security isolation requirements compared to Gitpod’s own services, they run on a dedicated node pool.

To enforce that the Gitpod components are scheduled to the proper node pools, you need to assign the following labels to the node pools:

| Node Pool            | Labels                                                                                                              |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Services Node Pool   | `gitpod.io/workload_meta=true`,<br/>`gitpod.io/workload_ide=true`,<br/>`gitpod.io/workload_workspace_services=true` |

Reviewer 2: I think we should omit the label `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_services=true` from `Services` node pool. Since we suggest we [group ide and meta workloads together](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/blob/main/install/installer/README.md#affinity-labels), all the workspace labels should be applied to the `Workspaces` nodepool.
